So let's start. Although
there are very few students
in the class, we have only
12 students.
Let's just start and
hopefully other students
join this session
while we are doing a review on
what we said the last week.
So.
First of all everyone, just
make sure everyone has the focus
to this slide. I mean, please
send me some feedback as before,
so then I can start the
lecture. Thank you.
Thank you Marco.
Thank you, Justin.
Dennis.
That's great, so everybody is
ready for today's lecture.
Thank you Jenna, Alexander, Taylor,
Dennis. Thank you, so.
Let's start, uh. We are
going to continue our topic
on sequential logic.
Just a quick recap.
Uh.
We start with building a unit
that memorizes a bit or a state
so we call that a latch,
and then we set up the latch to
be synchronized by the Clock,
either by a positive level or
negative level, meaning that
when the Clock becomes one, it
accepts the input to change the
internal state of the latch. It is
kind of a door or for the
negative level, I mean, when the
Clock becomes 0,
it enters the value of
the input of the latch in order
to change the state of the
latch. Then we said that we can
improve that design to have a
flip flop, meaning that we just
accept the input at one moment,
either the positive edge or
negative edge or both edges.
So basically a flip flop based
on our design is a single edge
triggered latch. So if a latch,
either RS, JK, D or T latch.
If they is gonna accept the input
only at the moment that the
Clock transits from zero to 1,
we call that a positive edge, or
from 1 to 0 a negative edge. So
basically any single edge trigger
latche is a flip flop. So to
show the flip flops, we said that
the block diagram has a
triangle. Instead of just enable
input, it has Clock, a triangle
meaning that these
flip flops are working based on
the positive edge, RS. So just
as a reminder in a RS flip
flop, 00 stores 01 meaning that
R=1 S=0, reset. S=1 R=0, set.
and 11 is not permitted.
The D flip flop, again Flip Flop
Zero makes it 0. 1 makes it one.
So basically whatever is in the
input goes inside the flip flop.
The T flip Flop Zero stores
one compliment, so if the input
is zero, it just stores. But if
the input is one in the T flip
flop, it complements whatever
the current state is. If it is
zero it makes it one. If it is
1, makes it 0 and in the JK flip
flop, we said that this is
a complete flip flop, meaning
that it has all the four
actions. 00 stores. 01, the K is
the same as they are, so K=1 J=0 or 01
makes it reset. J=1 K=0 makes it set
and 1 1 here is permitted
and makes it compliment. And the
JK comes from Jack Kilby
who invented this
flip flop.
For all these flip flops on the
triangle positive edge,
whenever they want to change the
state, they look at the input
values at the positive edges of
the Clock from zero to 1 and
at that point we see what are the
inputs. If you are given for
instance the RS flip flop, what
is going to be the value of R&S
at the moment that the
transit actually occurs?
The negative edge is here. We
put a inversion bubble behind
the triangle, just meaning that
this flip flop is working based
on the negative edges, and the
negative edges are those edges
that transit from 1 to 0.
And then we said that now that
we have the complete or ideal
memory unit, a flip flop that is
working perfectly on an edge, by
default positive edge. So the
next important task is now we
know how to store 1 bit. So
let's make some meaningful
circuits to accomplish some
tasks. So let's build some
larger memory units or larger
circuits that have memory units.
So we said that the tasks are
analysis tasks or design tasks,
the same as in the combinational
logic. So when we introduced
the gates in the combinational
logic, you said that now that we
know the gates, the next task is
to build a bigger I mean
circuit. So we said first is the
analysis. We are given the
circuit and we have to analyze
the behavior. The next task is
design. So we are given a
problem and we have to design
a circuit for that. The same is
here, so in the analysis we are
given a sequential circuit and
we are asked to analyze the
behavior of this circuit. In the
design task, we are given a
problem and we have to design a
circuit for that problem, and we
solve that problem by sequential
circuit or sequential logic.
So we already said that.
Any sequential logic can be
categorized into three main
types: those that only have flip
flops, those that have flip
flops plus some external
inputs. By inputs I don't mean
the inputs to the flip flop, I
mean inputs that comes from the
external portion of the sequential
logic and may impact the
internal state of the flip flops
or not. We will see this next
lecture. Or flip flops with inputs
and outputs. So as you can
see, we make the sequential
logic more complex, but
instead we have more
capability for the sequential
circuit.
So for
the first category, which is only
flip flop, we started with
the analysis task and then today
we are going to start with the
design task. So last lecture, we
ran out of time and we couldn't
completely review the analysis
task. So today, I'm going to
explain it again by putting more
focus on it and then we will continue with
the design. So for
the analysis task,
I'm going to explain with an
example step by step. It's kind of
a workshop for the analysis
task. So basically in the
analysis that you are given this
circuit. So you are given this
and you're asked to analyze the
behavior of this circuit.
So the first question
you have to ask yourself is that
is this given circuit
sequential logic or combinational
logic? So you already knew
how to analyze the combinational
logic in the second and third
chapter. But how can you
distinguish the sequential logic
from the sequential logic?
Sorry, the combinational logic
from the sequential logic.
In order to answer this
question, you just have to look
at the circuit and see whether
there is a flip flop or a
feedback. If there is at least
one flip flop or at least one
feedback, it means that you are
dealing with a sequential
circuit. Otherwise you are
dealing with a combinational
circuit. So this way, you can
distinguish different analysis.
So by looking at this given
circuit, you see that we are
given 3 flip flops, not only 1, but 3.
And also we have some feedbacks.
The output of the last flip
flop comes to the first flip
flop, so these are some
feedbacks. Also the output of the
T flip flop come back to the RS
flip flop here, so this is
trivial that the given circuit
is a sequential circuit.
After that you have to see OK,
now that I know that this
circuit we are given is a
sequential circuit, we have to
see what are the flip flops and
what are the type of types of
flip flops. For each flip flop,
you pick a name. This is very
similar to the combinational
circuit. So in the combinational
circuit, you have to see what are
the input binary variables and
you have to pick a name for them. Here there
are no inputs,
you have flip flops only, so you
have to pick a name for each
flip flop and then you have to
know the type of flip flop.
So. In this circuit, I chose the
first flip flop as A, the second
one as B and the last one as C,
and I put a note that the A flip
flop is a JK flip flop. We
already knew what we have
note them. We have to
recall what are the
characteristics of JK flip
flop? For instance 00 stores 01
reset. 10 sets and 11 compliments.
The same is here, so this is the
T flip flop. 0 stores one
compliment. And then here the C
flip flop, so we can call
them by their name. So
the C Flip Flop is a RS flip
flop, so 00 stores. If R is 1, S
is zero, reset. If R
is 0 and S is 1, set. And if both
are one, it is not permitted.
So we never expect the R and S to
become one both together.
So we pick a name and we know
what are the flip flops.
And the second step is.
We have to see how many
different states this circuit
actually is gonna produce.
This is based on the number
of flip flops. We know that
each flip flop can preserve
either zero or one, so each
flip flop is gonna have two
different states, so as you
can see here: zero or one.
Based on the different states of
a one single flip flop, you can
determine what are going to be
the different combinations
in the whole circuit. So
basically 2 to the power of
number of flip flops in the
circuit. So in our example, we
are given 3 flip flops. Each one
can have two different states,
so in total we're going to have
eight different states in the
whole circuit. 2 to the power of
3 = eight combinations.
And then you have to create a
state table. We said that the
state table is similar to a truth
table, but not exactly the same.
So in this table.
For each flip flop, we have one
column to show the current state
or the current value of the flip
flop. One column for the next
value of the flip flop or next
state of the flip flop. So
basically for each flip flop, we have two
columns, and the number of rows
depends on the number of
combinations for the states. So
for each combination, we have one row.
So in our example we are given 3
flip flops. The A flip flop for
current Q(T). And the next
Q(T+1).
There B flip flop has current
value and next value, and the
C Flip Flop has current value
and next value.
Also, the number of rows. As you
can see here the number of rows
is 8 because given 3 flip
flops, we is gonna have eight
different current states and 8
different next states.
So when we have these states, when
we form the state table, we have
to fill out the state table.
What are the entries in the
state table? So in order to fill
out this table, you have to for
the current, you just
put all the different
combinations or
possibilities. Like the truth
table, when you put the
possibilities for the input
binary variables. Here we
have flip flops. So you put
the different possibilities
for the flip flops.
And then you have to determine
what's going to be the next
value or the state of each flip
flop. But remember, when you
want to calculate the next
value of the flip flop, you have
to check the current state of
the flip flop and what are the
inputs of the flip flop.
So in the left side, for the
current state, we assume that
if they are in the zero state,
all the flip flops are
zero. What happens if they are
in this state C=0 B=0 A=1?
What happens when the C is 0, B is
1, and A is 0? You can see that these are
different possibilities for the
current state. Very similar to
the truth table for the
combinational circuits, and
if we assume that ABC are the
input binary variables. But this
is similar, not exactly the
same, because here, ABC are flip
flops, not binary variables.
And the next for this, the left
side. For the current state, it is
very easy to fill out, but the
right side is important to fill
out. The right side tells what's going
to be the next value of A if the
current value of A is 0.
And the value of the input
for the JK flip flop or A matters too,
so we have to pay attention
to these two items.
So let's start.
So. We want to calculate what's
going to be the next state of A,
so the current value of A is 0.
What's going to be the next
value of A? And when we say
what's the next value, we mean that
these are the flip flops that
are attached to the Clock and these
flip flops are working based on
the positive edge, meaning that
when the first positive edge at this
first transition from zero to
one comes to the Clock,
the A changes
from 0 to the 1 value.
So this depends on the current
state and the input of the
JK. So the current
state of A is 0.
The input, the J input of the
JK Flip Flop or the Flip
Flop A is attached to the
complement of the B flip flop.
So we know that it flip flop has
a Q and Q bar, so this is attached to
the Q bar of the B, so Q bar of
the B when we are at the current state.
So assume that currently
the A is zero, B is 0, and C is 0.
So this is the current state. So
the JK is gonna be
B bar. Q Bar of B at
current of B
is zero followed by
the not becomes one.
The K is attached to T. The Q
of the B.
So whatever the current state of
B is, it's going to the K, so the K of A
is the current state of B, which
is 0. So putting all these
together, the current state is A.
The input of J is 1, the input
of K is 0. This is
what action in the JK?
Can anybody in the chat box
answer this? So if you have
J=1 K=0 in the input of
JK, what's the action?
Correct, it's set, so we is gonna set. So
we were in the 0.
And the next step
is gonna be set, so 1.
So this is the next value of A.
After the first positive edge, A
goes to one.
From zero goes to one.
So this same, we have to do the
same thing for all these cells
in the right side of the state
table. So for B. B currently
is zero. So, what's going to be
the next step after the
first positive edge?
And one thing is that you
have to pay attention to is that
this transition of the B is in
parallel with A. So because all
are attached to the same Clock,
so they all simultaneously
transit from one state to
another state so
when the A transit from zero to
one, at the same time B is
transitted from zero to what?
So again. The current
state of B is 0.
What is the input of T? The
input of the B flip flop which is
of type T, comes from the
output of the C followed by the
not. So C is currently zero
followed by the not becomes
one, so Q of the C flip flop is
followed by the not is the
input to the T.
So currently it is zero, followed
by the not becomes one and in
the T flip flop, when the
input is 1. What happens?
Anyone in the chat box?
So we have T flip flop, the input
of T is 1. What's the action
in T flip flop when the input is 1?
Anybody?
Correct Marco, yes. Q bar
meaning that the compliment so
the action in the T flip flop if
the input is one is the
complement. So here is the
action. Compliment of
the current state of T,
current state is 0, so the
compliment is gonna be 1.
So this is the next state, B
transits from 0 to 1.
So next is the C, so C is an RS
flip flop, so we have to check
the current state, the input of
R and input of S and see what
happens to the C Flip Flop.
The current state is zero, as
you can see here.
The current state of C is 0. The
input to the R.
Let's see the circuit.
R is attached to
the output of A.
So the Q of A
is attached to the R of the C
flip flop.
The current state of A, the
current state of A is 0, so zero
goes here and attaches to R.
So R of C is 0.
What is attaching to S?
The S is attached to the
output of B.
And B currently is 0.
So B is gonna be 0. So R is 0,
S is 0 and we wait for the
first positive edge. So when
the first positive edge
comes, 00 makes the current
state of C to what state?
Anybody in the chat box?
So if we are given this RS flip
flop, both inputs of the RS are
00. Yes, correct Paul. So we're
is gonna store. Correct. The
current state is 0, so we're
going to store it so, we
store 0. And this is
the state, so basically
when this circuit is in the
000 state at the first positive
edge, it transits to 011. So from
zero goes to 3
in decimal system.
So the same, actually you have
to fill out all the rows in
the right side the same way.
So one thing is that,
for simplicity, we could say
that instead of just saying that
Q of the A flip flop at current
T, we could simply summarize
this as A.
And the second output of each
flip flop, the Q bar of A flip
flop at current, we could simply
say that is A bar. So this is just
for simplification, I mean
you could see that this is very
similar to the binary variables.
But again, remember we are in
the sequential logic and these
names are flip flops, not binary
variables. So just for
simplification, instead of just
saying that the current
state of the A flip flop is A.
Or is Q of A at current, we
can simply set A.
Or the not of the current state
of the A flip flop, Q of A at T
not, we could simply input A bar
just for simplification. So
let's see what happens when we
do this simplification. So for
the next state, for the
next row, we are in the 001. So
first, we have to see where A transits
to what value?
So A is 1 currently. So instead
of saying the current
state of A, so Q(T) for A is 1, we
can simply say that A is 1.
So now what's the input to the
J&K?
So the J input is attached to
the B flip flop.
And it is attached to the not
output, so B bar.
B currently is zero, followed
by the not becomes one.
Currently 0 not becomes
1. K is attached to the Q
output of the flip flop. So
currently, B is 0.
And 0 goes to K of A.
And when we have J=1 K=0, we are
in the set action. It means that
whatever the current state is,
we bring a set.
We bring it to the set
state, so the current
is 1 and it goes to one.
So let's see what happens to B.
So B is 0.
Currently, so again, you can see
that instead of writing Q of B at
T is 0, I just simply put B as 0.
And the input to the B flip
flop right now is
Q of the RS flip flop here, the C
Flip Flop followed by the not.
Currently, this is zero. C is 0
followed by not becomes one, so
C bar, which is 1.
And in the T flip flop, one is in
the input means compliment, so the
complement action. The current
zero becomes one.
The same for the C flip
flop. Currently C is zero, R of C is
attached to, as you can see
here, to the main output of
the A flip flop.
A is currently one,
so one comes here.
S is attached to the output of
the B flip flop and B is
currently 0. So S of C is
0. And 10, R=1 S=0 in the
RS flip flop means reset.
So reset action goes to 0, so
zero goes to 0.
So you have to continue the same
for all the other states, so.
010 goes to 100
and then 011 goes to,
for A goes to zero, for B goes to
zero, and for C goes to don't care.
Or an indeterminate state. And
the reason is.
Why does this happens?
R is attached to A
Which is currently one.
OK. Also, S is attached to
B, which is currently one.
So 11 in the input of the RS.
The C Flip flop
is zero. Both inputs are 11,
so this is not permitted.
And if you have 11 in the
RS, it brings it to the
indeterminate state.
So that's the reason.
And again you continue this way.
If you are given 100, what's
going to be the next? It is going to
be 5 or 101. If you're at five, you
are going to one.
If you're at 6 or 110, which transits
at the next positive edge, we
transit to the 010, which is 2.
And then if you are given
the seventh state, we go to the
again, to the indeterminate state
for C and 10 for A and B.
So this way we fill out the
state table, and after the state
table, by looking at the state table,
you can simply say
that if you are at zero, you go
to three. If you are at
one, you go to three, and etc.
So either you can see
in the decimal system
or in the binary system.
And based on this transition,
you can create another diagram
which is called a state
transition diagram. You already
saw this state transition
diagram for the flip
flops just to study the life
cycle of flip flops.
Here we can do the same for
larger circuits, sequential
circuits. So basically for each
state you create a node,
and from one state or one node
to another state, you create a
directed edge. So for this
example, basically this becomes
the transition state
diagram. So as you can see in
the state table from zero.
000, you transit to the 011.
So in the state transition
diagram zero or 000 transits
to 011,
so basically each row is gonna have
its own node.
And the edges are the
transition from each state
to another state.
So again from 1 or 001, you transit
to three. So let's see from
1 or 001, you transit to 3 or 011.
Also, for instance, from
5 or 101, you transit to 1 or 001.
So let's see for the
5. Here is the 5 or 101.
You transit to 1 or 001.
There are two states that
transit to the indeterminate
state: three and seven, because
in these two states, the C
flip flop goes to the
indeterminate state. So in the
state table as you can see here.
If you are at 011, the C flip
flip flop goes to
the indeterminate state.
Also, when we are at the 7.
So in this state transition, you
see that from three and seven we
go to a indeterminate state.
And we're done. But the thing
is, you can do another
optional step, meaning that
do an analysis of the state
transition diagram just to
figure out or just to explain
more about the behavior of the
circuit.
So that circuit, that
sequential circuit actually
acts like this. From zero at
the first positive edge goes
to three, and at the next
positive edge, goes to
indeterminate state and it
stays there.
OK. If by some,
uh, if you initialize the
circuit by 110,
at the first positive edge, it
goes to two. Next positive it
goes to four, and then next goes
to five, and then from five goes
to one, and from one goes to
three and then finally goes to
here. You see that in this
circuit, all the paths that end
up with this state
suddenly goes to the
indeterminate, so if you wanted
to improve this sequential
circuit, you have to kind of
provide a solution to handle
this state. You have to
create a transition from this
state to another state here
instead of going to the
indeterminate state.
So this is optional, but this is
just a hint for you that by
state transition diagram, you can
study more about the behavior and find
the bottleneck or not the
bottleneck. Find the issues
with the circuit in order to
solve the issue.
Or you can ask some questions,
what is the longest life
cycle of the circuit? This is
the longest life cycle. So if
you start from here 123456. So
after 6 positive edges it goes
to the indeterminate state.
And one thing is that, you could
ask is it possible to get rid of
this state? Is it possible to
transit from this state to
another state? The answer here
is no, and the reason is if you
go back to the state table,
in the left side, you don't have
any current state like this.
So in the left side, you
see don't care 00 in order to
see what's going
to be the next state.
So that's why in the
transit state, you don't
know where to go.
Ah.
Any questions so far?
And here's the recap before your
questions. I'm just doing a recap. So
firstly, you have to see the
given circuit for the analysis.
The given circuit is
sequential or combinational.
If you see one flip flop at
least or a feedback, it is
sequential. Otherwise is
combinational.
Then you start your analysis. For
the sequential circuit, you have
to see what are the
flip flops. So basically they
are either RS, D, T, JK
or a mix of each other. For
instance two JK, one RS, and
etc. And then you have to pick a
name for them. So A B C X Y Z,
whatever naming you prefer, you
have to pick a name for each
flip flop. Flip flop. Flip flops.
And then you have to see what
are the number of different
states for the whole circuit.
This is basically based on this
formula, so if you are given N
flip flops, you have to just
make it a power of two. So 2 to the
power of number of
flip flops actually gives you
the number of combinations.
And after that, you have to form
this state table. The state table for
each flip flip flip flops.
Actually, uh oh my god, I cannot
pronounce flip flops anymore. :)
This is flip flops.
For each memory unit, you have to
create one column for current
state, one column for the next
state. And then you have to form
rows in the total
number of combinations.
2 to the power of number
of memory units.
And then after that you have to
fill out the state table. As I
said, the current state is very
easy to fill out but the next
state, you have to pay attention
to the current state and the
input to the memory units.
And finally, after forming this
state table, you have to form
the state transition diagram so
the state transition diagram is
a diagram that
gives the full behavior of the
given circuit. Also, you can
optionally analyze the path
between the states to figure out
what's the longest path, what's the
shortest path and what path we
actually end up with
in determining the states and if
you wanted to fix the circuit.
So any questions so far?
Please ask your question
because we are going to
introduce the next task, which
is the design task. So if there are any
questions I'm happy to answer them
regarding the analysis of the
sequential circuits.
No questions.
Oh, Paul has a question. Will the
entire analysis process be
a question in the final?
Yes, but sometimes we can
simplify that. Sometimes we said
that this is the sequential
circuit and this is the state
table. Draw the state transition
diagram. This is the simplest
form. Or we could say that we
could give you the state table
and we ask you just to fill
out the next state based on the
given circuit, so we can
simplify the whole process, but
sometimes, at least one
question is gonna be regarding the
whole steps. So basically you
are given a sequential circuit.
Basically you are given a
circuit, maybe the circuit is
combinational. So, it's easy.
You already know how to analyze
it, but mostly I mean,
the given circuit is sequential
and you have to do all these
steps. So the most important
part is the state table and the
state transition diagram.
So there are two main steps in
the analysis. Any other
questions?
Yes, to answer your question
Paul. Yes, there is gonna be one
question regarding the analysis
of these sequential circuit.
One or two. I don't know
what the number is.
So let's move on, move to the
design of the sequential
circuit. When we have only
memory units or flip flops.
So again, I'm going to explain
this by an example. So through
this example I explained the
steps and finally we do a recap
on these steps.
So imagine we are given this
problem. We want to
design a circuit that does
counting from zero to N.
012345 up until
N. So you might ask, what's
the usage of this circuit?
Yyou remember once I said
that instead of just multiplying
in the combinational logic, you
can do addition multiple times.
For instance, 2 * 5 is equal to
adding two five times.
So another way to do
multiplication is addition a
number of times. So if you
build a counter, you can
count the number of additions
and then do the
multiplication. So this is 1
usage.
There are different uses for
that. For instance, sometimes
you need
just a specific amount of Clock
pulses. For instance, you wanna
do a task which needs only 10
pulses, positive edges. So by
counter, you can attach your
counter with the original Clock
in the system and you start
counting up until for instance 10,
and after 10 you stop. You make
an end on the Clock, and you always
generate zero for the Clock. So
basically if you
attached a counter with the clock,
you can count the number of
pulses and stop whenever you
want to stop your counter.
So this is another usage
of that. So let's see how
can we design a counter.
The first step, actually, as I
said, the zero phase is that
are we going to design
a combinational circuit
or a sequential circuit?
So the same, the similar question
with the analysis. Are we
dealing with the sequential
circuit or combination circuit?
The thing is, when you are in
the design task, you have to ask
this question from yourself.
Do we need memory units?
As long as you need a memory
unit, you are dealing with
designing a sequential circuit.
Otherwise you don't need to
design a sequential circuit. You
are dealing with a combinational
circuit as we did for the
combinational logic chapters.
So let's see if this problem needs
memory or not.
So counting from zero to
N means that 0 to 1 to 2 to 3 up
until N - 1 and then N.
The thing is, whenever we do
counting, this is trivial, but
you have to think about that
if you want to count to
N, you have to store your
previous number in order to go
to the next number. So for
instance, if you want to go to
two, you have to see if
whether you are in one or not.
If you are in one, you can go to
two, but if you are in 0, you can
go to one. So at each time you
have to see what's the current
number in order to see what's
going to be the next number.
So this implies that you need
a storage to store the current
number. By storing the current
number, you know what's
going to be the next number. If
you don't store the current
number, you don't know from what
number you wanna go to the next
time. You know you have to count,
you have to increment by one,
but you don't know where to add that
one to what number?
So. You need a storage to store
the current number. This means
that you are dealing with
designing a sequential circuit.
Whenever you need the storage
memory, it means that you need
flip flops or
memory units and you are
dealing with a sequential
circuit.
So the first question was this.
So that was the sequential
circuit because we need the
storage. So the next question
is going to be this. Now that we
need storage, how much storage
units do we need? We knew that we can store
1 binary bits, a zero or
one in flip flops, so
the the next question is that if
you need storage, how much
storage? When we say how many in
a binary system when a binary
computer system we are dealing
with the number of digits. So
you have to see when you want to
store the current state or the
current number. In our example,
what's going to be the current
number in binary system?
How many binary digit current state
that is gonna have?
So in our example, if N is
equal to 7, meaning that we want
to count from zero to 7 ,1234567.
If you transfer these numbers,
decimal numbers to binary
system, it becomes 000 goes to 001
goes to 010 and etc. So because the
maximum number in the counter is
7 for representing seven, we
need 3 bits.
3 bits means 3 flip flops
because each flip flops can
store 1 bit. So now we know how
many storage we need.
So we need a storage. We need
3 bits to store 3 bits,
so we need 3 flip flops. The
next state is.
from the state table.
The state table here, uh oh,
sorry form the state transition
diagram in order to see that
from what is it we're going to?
What other state?
So this is very similar to the
analysis task. So basically each
state is gonna have one note an
from one state to the next step.
We're going to have a directed
edge. Here, each state is the
current number. Next state is
the next number in this example.
So. From zero we want to go to 1
from 1, one to go to two.
then 3 then four, then five,
then six, and then finally 7.
What happens after 7? So
basically based on our problem
definition, they say that we
want to count from zero to 7,
but it doesn't say after 7, what
happens? So this is a design
choice, so because the problem
is ambiguous or vague in this
state, we can decide where to go
from 7. So what would be your
design choice in this?
The transition diagram so from
7. How do you fix this problem?
Off Marco says, back to 0 this
is 1 design option so we can we
come back from 7 to 0.
Is there any other option?
Oh Nonika says store 7
Store 7. You're right, meaning
that it stay at 7, so from zero
to 7 and then stay as seven
forever. So these are two
options. You could say that from
7 I'll go to two from 7. I go to
five, but two meaningful fix to
the problem. Gonna be as the
Marco says. and Nonika says one
of them is from 7 to 0.
Which means that loop, so we do
counting forever from zero 1 2 7
and then again 7127. So
basically we do counting
forever. Or as Nonika
says, we can say that from 7 we
stay at 7, so we just one time
count and then stay here.
OK. So one time counter.
And this one loop forever.
So these are two options. We
continue with this one, but for
the new next slide I'm going to
explain the two options so.
After the we now we know that we
are dealing with the sequential
circuit because we need the
memory. We know how many memory
we need based basically it's
number is gonna have 3 bit. So
we need 3 memory in it.
And then after three memory
units, we know from what is
said, we is gonna translate to what
is that based on this diagram.
And the next state. The next
step is the.
State table. So this is the
reverse of the analysis. Kind of
so now we have to form this
state table. The state table is
again very similar to the
analysis. Two column for each
flip flops. Current
state next state.
So a. 3 flip
flops ABC will pick a
name for them.
Because we need 3 memory
units, so we need 3 flip flops.
We don't know the type of the
flip flops yet, but we know at
least that we need flip flops.
So ABC will pick a name for
them. The current state of a the
next state of a the current
state of B next of B and current
Of C and next of C.
And the rows are different
combination of these states.
So we have to fill out the
design at the state table.
The thing is here, in order to
fill out their state table, we
don't. This is unlike the
analysis a step.
Here we already knew what's the
next state is.
Based on the state transition
diagram, we know that from zero
we have to go to one.
So this state table filling out
the state table in In a design.
Task is very easy because we
already know this state
transition diagram, so we know
that from what is said, we go to
what other state. From zero we
go to one. from One we go to
two. 2 to 3,3 to 4,4 to 5,5 to six, 6 to
7 and from 7. As we said,
we have two options. Either look
back to 0 or stuck in seven
or look forever in seven.
So we continue with the
looping the from 7  back to
zero and then 0 to 1,2. So we look
forever. If this is design
choice you could design based
on storing staying at 7
forever, but we continue this
example on this choice.
And then up until now, all the
design steps were just based on
regardless of the type of the
flip flops. So we picked the
memory. Memory units we form the
state transition diagram. We
form the state table. Now we
want to design the circuit.
So the this is that you have to
pick a flip flop flip flops.
Either you can choose all the
memory in its kind, big kind
type of Rs or all the your
memory units become D or T or G
or mix. You could say that I
want to pick two JK or one T
or I want to design this circuit
by 1D and 2T flip flops.
So this is the design choice.
Sometimes in the problem they
say that we want to design a
circiut only by D flip flops or
only by JK. But sometimes if
they don't do this is your
choice to pick one of these flip
flops or mix of them.
And then, uh.
You could ask what are the
preference? So in terms of the
design doesn't matter. You can
choose whatever flip flops you
like. If the problem doesn't state
that. But in terms of
efficiency, efficiency as you
already know, in the
combinational design
efficiencies, the less number
of gates, less number of
inputs in the gates less number of
connections, etc.
We'll see that the choice of the
flip flop flip flops actually
has an impact on the efficiency.
But for now, for the design task
we say that we don't care about
the efficiency. For now, we just
care about the efficacy or the.
Correctness of the design.
Later I mean next lecture. I'm
going to explain this a little
more about the efficiency.
So now we want to count from
zero to 7. We need 3 flip flops
and I chose JK because jk
is the complete flip flop. It
has a four actions store, reset,
set and compliment. So let's
design this circuit by JK.
So another recap. So from now I
mean because the next few slides
are very important, so so far.
First, we detect we need a
sequential circuit because we
need a memory.
Because we want to store
count from zero to 7 and
then from zero to 7, we
need 3 memory units.
We formed the state transition
Diagram 0 to 1 2 3 up until 7,
and then we chose from 7. Go
back to 0. This is the design
choice of us.
And then we picked the JK
flip flops as our memory units.
We pick a name for them. ABC and
D form the state table. The
current state of the A, the next
state of A and etc. So
from zero we go to one from one.
We go to two and up until here
from 7 we moved to zero and then
again we looked for ever so a
state transition diagram is
state table and the flip flops.
What is the remaining part
of the circuit to finish the
design? Anybody in the chat
can answer that.
So what's going to be
the next? I mean, step?
What we missed so far and we
have to do that to complete
this circuit.
Correct, Taylor actually
correct.
The thing is, now we have flip
flops. All are attached to the
Clock an or are working based on
the positive edges. But we
didn't figure out the input to
the each flip flops.
So in order for the transition
from zero to 1.
In order to make zero in the 8
to one, what value should be in
the input of the J and K for
the A? What's the value of J and
what's the value of K for the
D flip flops and also the same
for C? So the next important
step is. Forming the inputs to
the flip flops.
This is the most important part
of the design task, meaning that
the Boolean expression for the
input of each flip flops. What
are they? So we called these
Boolean expressions, input
equations or excitation
equations. So basically this is
a specific name for this type of
equations, so any Boolean
expression that determines the
input of a flip flops called
excitation equation or input
equation. So whenever you see
this word excitation equation,
meaning that the Boolean
expression is going to be the
input of the flip flops.
So let's see what are the
excitation equation for our
three flip flops.
So we have 3 flip flops ABC. You
have to determine the input for
a. J because they are JK flip
flops. So we have two inputs.
The J of A K of A the j of B,K
of B &J of C, K oF C.
If you could choose T flip
flops, how many input
equations you need?
If all these flip flops are
T flip flops, how many
inputs or how many
excitation equation you
need?
Anybody in the chat?
Correct Power says one for each
flip flops because we in the
team we only have one input. So
for each one we need only one
equation so one for a 1 for B 1 for C.
If it is D flip-flop, so again
one because the flip flop only
have one input so one for a
1 for B,1 for C.if all the ABC is the
D flip flops. If there Rs flip
flops for R for a we have to see
2 1 for R one for S. If B is Rs
we need two RS for B. If C is RS R and
S for them. So based on the
type of the.
Flip flops. Actually we need to
determine the equations for the
input. For JK, we need 2
equations for each flip flops
one for J 1 for K.
So let's start for the A.
So I need your full attention to
these few slides because this is
very tricky. So.
Base on the state table.
You have to determine the input
of each flip flops. Let's start
with the edge for the A for the
next state of A. You don't
care about the next state of
B and C. So that's why I put a kind
of ignore. I mean, kind of this
here just to shade this part of
the state table.
Because we only need to pay
attention to the next state of
a. So based on the current state
of the circuit, we want to see
what's going to be the next step
of only a because we are going
to form the Boolean expression
for the a flip flops for now.
For a you can form this part,
attach the state table, but this
is not the official part of this
table. This is just for your
help. You could say that.
What's the action that brings
the A from zero to 1?
And based on this action, you
could say that what's the value
of J and what's the value of K?
So if zero goes to one.
We need to do a set.
For a flip flop so O becomes one
meaning that we have to do a set
action. and set means in the JK
means that J must be one, and K
must be zero. You see the
reverse, so we already knew
based on the input of the flip-flop
what happens to the internal
state. Now we knew the next
state. We have to see what's
going to be the input.
So zero goes one. It means that
we did set an set means that we
put one in the J and zero in the K.
Or we could say that from zero
to one in the jk, it means
that you did compliment either
of them. So compliment is that
whatever you have to and not on
top of that zero becomes one.
So you could say that you did
compliment for compliment. You
have to put one in the J and one
in the K. So.
Either action is eligible, so
you could say that either set or
complement. In either action, J
must be one, but for the K,K must
either zero or one. So whenever
you see. Either one or zero. It
means that the value of K
doesn't matter. You could simply
fill out with. The don't care
item, or they don't care value.
Meaning that the value of it
doesn't matter. As long as J
is 1, it brings the flip flop
from zero to 1 because it
acts like set or complement.
Any questions so far?
No questions, so let's move on
to the next state of a.
Because we are only dealing with
the a flip flops.
The a flip flops the next state
from one goes to 0 1 to 0 means that
we did reset.
For do you reset? J must be 0. K
must be one or.
You did compliment you were in
the one you did. Another
compliment one becomes 0 for
doing compliment. It means that
the J is 1 K is 1.
Putting these two
together, it means that
either you did reset or
complement for these two
actions, K must be 1,
the J doesn't matter
either zero or one.
The next state is here from zero
to one. This is exactly the same
as the first one, zero to 1, so
again from zero to one. You
could say that either we did
set. Or you did compliment?
In both cases, they must be 1.
The K doesn't matter.
This one one goes to 0. So
again either you did reset
or complement. So K must
be one, J doesn't matter.
And if you continue this way,
you fill out the.
Action part of the stable for
only a. As you can see here,
these are only for the input of
a J A K A.
And this this is not the
official part of this table,
but you can add this column
just to because it's easy if
you attach it to the state table,
it's very easy to see what
action is gonna be for this
transitions.
So now if you look from
the combinational perspective
combination logic perspective.
These these the left side of the
state table is gonna be like the
input binary variables.
This part is gonna be like the
output binary variables and you
have to write the output binary
variables based on the Boolean
functions of the inputs.
So you see that you can write
the JA. Based on the
minterms for those entries,
that makes it one.
So JA becomes one whenever we
have 000 in ABC.
So this is the minterm 0.
Oh JA becomes one when the A
is zero, B is 1 C is zero. This
is the minterm 2.
Or this 1 minterm
4? Or this
one minterm 6.
So again, this is not exactly
the truth table, but this is the
way we can come up with the
Boolean function or Boolean
equation. Or I mean specifically
excitation equation for J for
the a flip flop.
The same for K, K is 1 in this
entry, which is min term 1.
This one minterm 3 this one
minterm 5 and this one minterm 7
so. Based on the minterms and
don't care condition you can
write the Boolean function so JA
is equal to based on ABC this is
not. This is very similar to the
Boolean function in the
combinational circuit but ABC
are not input binary variables.
They are flip flops.
But they act like a binary
variables. So based on the
ABC, the flip flops the JA
becomes one at the minterm
0246 and all the other
entries are don't care.
K A becomes one at minterm 1 and
1357 and all the other
entries are Don't care.
The next step is the Boolean
functions or excitation
equations for the B flip flop.
JB KB any questions so far?
No questions.
So for the KB same. So this time
we only pay attention the next
state of the B.
So we do not care about the next
state of A&C. We only care about
the next state of B based on the
current state of the ABC.
So we attach another three
columns. Again, these are not
part of the state table, but you
can attach it to help you. I
mean fine. Figure out the
actions. So this time we are
dealing with the B flip flop
so JB, KB and the action for
the B Flip Flop, this one the
middle one.
So. For the first row, B from
zero goes to 0.
In the JK flip flop, this
means the store.
So we just store meaning that
from zero to 0 for the store
action in the JK Flip Flop
we have to put zero in the J&K
is gonna be 0 too so 00 stores.
And next transit from zero to 0.
What is the other possible
action? Anybody in the chat
box can say? Is there any
possible action?
From zero to 0. Is it possible
doing another action?
To have the same.
Next state.
Remember in the JK.
Anybody in the chat?
Correct, actually Paula is
correctly yes, the reset, so the
reset whatever the current state
is brings it to 0. So we could
say that zero reset to 0.
So another possible action
would be reset.
for doing reset J must be 0,K
Must be one.
So.
If you continue this way, zero
goes to zero, either store or
reset. the J must be 0. The K is
either zero or one, so doesn't
matter. From zero, the next row
from zero goes to one.
So zero goes to one. You did
either set or complement.
For doing these two actions, J
must be one, but K for the set
must be 0. For the compliment
must be one, so either zero or
one, which means that doesn't
matter the value of K.
The next row one goes to 1,
meaning that you did either
store. Any .00 or you did set,
meaning that 1 zero. So in both
cases the J doesn't matter,
K must be 0.
and etc. So you can see that now
if you write a Boolean function
for JB based on the input.
Variables or based on the
current state of the state
table. J becomes one only
minterm 001, which is the
minterm one. Or in the minterm in
this case, in the minterm 101,
which is minterm 5, so JB is 1
minterm, one and 5.
Also, these minterms are
don't care.
KB becomes one.
Only in the min term that see
minterms 3.
Or the last one minterm 7.
These are the Don't your
conditions and there are some
entries with zero. So if you
write the excitation equation or
the Boolean function, this is
for B. So B is sigma minterm 1 and
five plus. These are the don't care.
KB is Sigma minterm three and
seven. And these are the
don't care conditions.
So the same.
For the C flip-flop.
Again, for the C flip flop, we
don't care about the next state
of A&B. We only care about the
next state of C.
An see from zero to zero other
your store or reset.
So the J is gonna be 0 at K,
doesn't matter because it's
storming the zero reset means
that K is 1. So either 01. So
the value doesn't matter.
The next row zero goes to zero
the same as previous row, so
either zero either restore or
reset. So zero don't care.
For the first four row, for
the first three row, you see
that zero goes to 0, so the
same actions and the same
inputs to the J&K.
The 4th. row zero for the C
Transit to one, it means that
you did either complements or
you did set this time. J must be
1 K, doesn't matter.
An, etc.
So if you write a Boolean
or excitation equation for
JC, the only entry that
this is one is minterm 3.
And these are the don't care
conditions for the KC. The only
time that it becomes one. There
is no way to becomes one.
Uh.
Am I right?
Seems that there is no way to
becomes one. So basically KC
either only have don't care.
I guess I did wrong here.
Because one goes to zero. Either
you did compliment compliment means
that one one.
Oh, you did reset
reset means that.
So both doesn't matter. So yes,
this is correct.
So for the KC you don't
have any minterms, so.
Uh.
So for the KC, the value
you for this state for this
row, the value of JC and
KC doesn't matter so.
I have to fix this.
So the JC is only meeting
3 plus these are the
don't care the KC.
These are the don't cares.
+7, and there's no minterms to
make it 1, so I'll fix it up.
When I posted in Blackboard so
and then. Although you can see
that I mean for the don't care
condition, you could say that
you assume it as a one, but this
is that I need to fix this. So
now we have the excitation
equations for the old flip
flops. So Taylor says, I think
it's right 'cause you can either
have one one.
Or 01 in any case  the last digit is.
Oh, let's back here.
So Taylor says that either we
did complement means that one
one. Or we did reset.
For the reset we
need a 01, oh correct?
Taylor is right. No, let's let's
fix this right now.
Correct, let's fix this now.
So basically this is the way, so
for the compliments.
Or reset.
So let me do this laser
pointer.
So actually here is the fix, so
if you for 1 to 0, if you do
compliment means that both are
one, so 11.
If you do reset from one to
zero, meaning that the reset it
means that you did zero here and
one here. So in both cases the
KC must be one.
Yes, correct Taylor, thank
you.  Taylor. Yes, so
KC must be one. So the
only case that the KC
becomes one is the minterm 7.
So let's go to the next slide.
So these are the excitation
equations for inputs of each
flip flops. And whenever you
have the Boolean expression in
order to come up with an
efficient design, you have to
minimize that. So you have to
minimize your excitation
equations. So all these
functions are based on 3
variables ABC, so you can
use the 3 variable K map
to minimize that.
And so this is the three.
For each one. So because we have
JK  or we have two inputs
for each flip flop we have 3
flip flop. So we have 6 . We
need 6 Karnaugh map the the green
one is the a flip flop.
For the A flop JA KA the red
one is for the B flip flop JB
KB and the blue one is the
C flip flop JC KC.
So for the JA, based on these
meters and these don't condition
don't care conditions, you can
simply create a whole.
Adjacent cell.
And means that JA
must be always one.
The same for the KA always one.
For the JB, if you minimize the
using the this shared cells, you
assume that this is doing this.
Don't care cells or one. So
based on this JB becomes one.
KB based on this minimization
becomes A prime.
As you can see here, you can
assume that these cells are
one create a region.
And these are for the JC, so JC
this is the only entry min terms
that makes it 1 by this. Don't
care. Create is adjustments
region. BA the same is happening
for the KC. BA means that B and A.
So when you have the simplified
form of the excitation
equations, you can complete your
circuit. So this is your circuit
ABC or J K and these are the
inputs that J.
And these are the input
to the K.
So a means that it's is gonna be
attached to a.
A prime is not attached
to the A'.
B.
Here and then A and with each
other goes to J&K so again.
A comes from here. A bar comes
from here. A and B, A
and then B from here. So this is
B. This is a.
And this is the final circuit.
At the final step you can.
Test your design. You could say
that. So this is the circuit, so
I assume that from 5 it goes to
six. So let's see it happens or
not. If the current state is
101. After the first positive
edge, let's see what happens.
One goes to.
The input of the flip flop is
both 1, meaning that the
compliment and this state is 1.
So complement of 1 becomes 0.
Be.
Currently is 0.
J is attached to.
A which is 1 and K is attached
to not of a which is a.
A bar which is 1 followed
by not become 010 is a
set, so zero becomes one.
And then C.
C currently is 1. Attached to the
A&B A&B are both zero and one
becomes 0. So 00 means that
the store in the JK one
is gonna be stored.
So five goes to 6.
And you can check others cases
just to make sure that your
design is correct.
So this circiut starts from zero
up until 7 and then come back
to 0 again as long as there is a
positive edge from the Clock.
So we're done, uh, this is the
recap. So you can study these
recap at home. So basically you
have to see this problem needs a
sequential logic, needs memory
and then figure out how many
memory unit you need form the
state diagram form the state
table. Fill out this state
table, choose your flip flops.
Either stick to one of them
or mixture of them and then
this is the important part.
Form the equations for each
input of the flip flops.
And then minimize. Minimize
the equations and then
sketch this circuit.
There is an advanced design
algorithm, which means that.
You can reduce not only you
can minimize the equations for
the input of the flip flops,
you can reduce the number of
states when you reduce the
number of states, you can
reduce the number of flip
flops. It means that you are
efficient in the memory usage.
I want to cover this, but if you
take this course Thoery of
Automata, this is the title of the
course in the University of
Windsor. In this course there is
an algorithm that if you give a
state transition diagram.
It simplifies the diagram for
you, and using that
simplification algorithm you can
come up with the circuit that
needs less number of flip flops
or less number of memory.
And then next lecture is gonna
be we cover. Flip flops
plus inputs. So we is gonna
make it more complex.
So we're done for today. If you
have any questions, I'm happy to
take your questions and answer
to my knowledge.
Any questions?
So what will be the last lesson
before the final?
Last lesson is gonna be, uh, we
have to cover the flip flops
plus inputs plus outputs in the
next lecture. So this week we're
is gonna finish the sequential
logic. Next week, which is the
last week we is gonna put all these
together in order to come up
with a computer system. So we
want to introduce registers. The
main elements of the CPU and
putting all the combination
circuit and the sequential
circuits to come up with the
processing unit. The most
simplest processing units and
memory units and very simple way
how a computer system works.
The next course was is gonna be
the computer architecture 2
you fully understand the
whole component of the
computer system. But yes,
that's the plan. That's my
plan. So this week we're
is gonna finish the sequential
circuits next week. We're
is gonna put all the combination
logic and the sequential
logic to build the simplest
form of computer system.
So.
For the J K in the picture, is
there a reason ? Oh Oh no,
not a specific reason, so let's
practice the JK. The thing
is, the order of the good
question, justin the.
Order of the JK actually in
the block diagram doesn't
matter. Because in the block
diagram you have to see which
input is the J and which input
is the K. Even for the Rs flip
flop for the R, so let's
actually finish the slides.
That's back too.
Here, so in the in the block
diagram they say that which
input is the R, which input is
the S. So if I switch them so
SR doesn't matter in the Block
Diagram for instance this is the
KJ, but remember the K is the
input for doing the reset for
the JK and the J is the input
for doing the set. So this.
Characteristic table actually is
important based on the K and J, but
in the block diagram putting The
K 1st and J next or putting
the J first or K next doesn't
matter. But you have to put the
notation. Even for the Rs. So if
you put R first, S 2nd or S, 1st
R second doesn't matter.
In the block Diagram, but
the order in the truth
table matters.
Yeah.
So any other questions?
I'm with the final covered
topics before midterm like
number systems.
Not really, yes. Actually, uh,
whatever recovered in the
midterm is not going to be in
the final exam.
But The thing is, the knowledge
is required. So for instance, if
you have to know the binary #,
for instance 7, four, sixteen,
you have to see what is. You
have to know what is the minterms
or what are the Max terms or
etc. So the knowledge is
required but there is no
specific question regarding the
topics before the midterms.
Yes, for instance, there is no
question that you convert a
number from base 16 to a
number in base 7. There's no
such conversion questions or
there is no other related
question to the number
systems.
You're welcome.
Are all five handers till
Wednesday or are we still doing
the regular amount this way?
What do you mean is
on five handouts?
Basically, for the this week's
lab, and also this week's
assignment, due date is the this
week. I mean December 2nd, but
this is the official as I as I
explained in the assignments.
This is the official one, but we
accept all the late submissions
for all this from the all
students up until.
December 16 so do not. Do not
look at the official due date
due date. So basically you have
the two weeks extension.
So I'm going to be in the office
hour. If you have any question,
I'm ready to take your questions
there. Have a great day
and thank you so much.
is on so I just wanted
to stop the record.